docs/content/docs/(messaging)/discord-setup.mdx, before:

---
title: Discord Setup
description: Connect Spacebot to Discord.
---

# Discord Setup

Connect Spacebot to your Discord server. Takes about 5 minutes.

You need a **Bot Token** from a Discord application.

## Step 1: Create an Application

Go to [discord.com/developers/applications](https://discord.com/developers/applications) → **New Application**.

Name it whatever you want — this is the internal name, not the bot's display name.

## Step 2: Create a Bot

In your application settings, go to **Bot**:

- Click **Add Bot**
- Copy the **bot token** — you'll need this in a moment
- Scroll down to **Privileged Gateway Intents** and enable **Message Content Intent**

<Callout type="warn">
**Message Content Intent is required.** Without it, the bot cannot connect to Discord and will fail with "Disallowed intent(s)" error. Make sure it's enabled and you've clicked **Save Changes** at the bottom of the Bot page.
</Callout>

## Step 3: Invite the Bot to Your Server

In your application settings, go to **OAuth2** → **URL Generator**:

- Scopes: `bot`
- Bot Permissions:
  - Send Messages
  - Send Messages in Threads
  - Create Public Threads
  - Read Message History
  - Embed Links
  - Attach Files
  - Add Reactions

Copy the generated URL and open it in your browser to invite the bot.

## Step 4: Get Your Guild ID

In Discord, enable Developer Mode (User Settings → Advanced → Developer Mode). Right-click your server name → **Copy Server ID**. This is your guild ID.

## Step 5: Add Token to Spacebot

<Tabs items={["Spacebot UI", "TOML Config"]}>
<Tab value="Spacebot UI">

1. Open your Spacebot dashboard
2. Go to **Settings** → **Messaging Platforms**
3. Click **Setup** on the Discord card
4. Paste your **Bot Token**
5. Click **Save**

Spacebot connects immediately — no restart needed.

</Tab>
<Tab value="TOML Config">

```toml
[messaging.discord]
enabled = true
token = "your-bot-token"

[[bindings]]
agent_id = "main"
channel = "discord"
guild_id = "YOUR_GUILD_ID"
```

You can also reference environment variables:

```toml
[messaging.discord]
enabled = true
token = "env:DISCORD_BOT_TOKEN"
```

Token changes in config require a restart.

</Tab>
</Tabs>

## Verify It's Working

The Discord card on the Settings page shows a green status dot when connected. Send a message in a channel the bot has access to — you should see a typing indicator followed by a reply.

## Filtering

### Restrict to specific channels

By default the bot responds in every channel it has access to. To limit it, add channel IDs to your binding.

<Tabs items={["Spacebot UI", "TOML Config"]}>
<Tab value="Spacebot UI">

Go to **Settings** → **Bindings** tab and add channel IDs to your Discord binding.

</Tab>
<Tab value="TOML Config">

```toml
[[bindings]]
agent_id = "main"
channel = "discord"
guild_id = "123456789"
channel_ids = ["111111", "222222"]
```

If `channel_ids` is empty or omitted, the bot responds in all channels.

</Tab>
</Tabs>

### DM filtering

By default, all DMs are ignored. To allow specific users, add their Discord user IDs.

<Tabs items={["Spacebot UI", "TOML Config"]}>
<Tab value="Spacebot UI">

Go to **Settings** → **Messaging Platforms** → Discord card and add user IDs to the **DM Allowed Users** list.

</Tab>
<Tab value="TOML Config">

```toml
[messaging.discord]
dm_allowed_users = ["USER_ID_1", "USER_ID_2"]
```

You can also set per-binding DM allowlists:

```toml
[[bindings]]
agent_id = "main"
channel = "discord"
guild_id = "123456789"
dm_allowed_users = ["USER_ID_3"]
```

Per-binding lists are merged with the instance-wide list. Permission changes hot-reload within a couple seconds — no restart needed.

</Tab>
</Tabs>

### Multiple servers

Route different Discord servers to different agents.

<Tabs items={["Spacebot UI", "TOML Config"]}>
<Tab value="Spacebot UI">

Create multiple bindings in the **Bindings** tab, each with a different guild ID and agent.

</Tab>
<Tab value="TOML Config">

```toml
[[bindings]]
agent_id = "main"
channel = "discord"
guild_id = "123456789"

[[bindings]]
agent_id = "dev-bot"
channel = "discord"
guild_id = "987654321"
```

Each agent has its own memory, identity, and conversation history.

</Tab>
</Tabs>

## Threads

Threads get their own separate conversation with isolated history. Messages in the main channel share one conversation. Threads are the natural fit for isolated conversations in a busy server.

## Troubleshooting

| Symptom | Cause | Fix |
|---------|-------|-----|
| `Disallowed intent(s)` error in logs | Message Content Intent not enabled | Discord Developer Portal → Bot → enable Message Content Intent → Save Changes |
| Bot connects but doesn't see messages | Message Content Intent disabled | Discord Developer Portal → Bot → enable Message Content Intent |
| Bot doesn't respond in channel | No access | Make sure the bot has permissions in that channel |
| Bot doesn't respond to DMs | DM filtering | Add user ID to `dm_allowed_users` |
| Bot responds in wrong channels | No channel filter | Add `channel_ids` to your binding |
| `401 Unauthorized` on startup | Invalid token | Copy a fresh token from the Developer Portal |

Commit message:

feat(discord): add require_mention option for Discord bindings
This update introduces a new `require_mention` setting for Discord channel bindings, allowing the bot to only respond to messages that explicitly mention it or reply to its messages. This feature is particularly useful for managing interactions in busy channels.

Changes include:
- Updated Discord setup documentation to reflect the new option.
- Modified API interfaces and components to support `require_mention`.
- Implemented logic in the message handling pipeline to respect the new setting.

Additionally, a new design document for participant awareness has been added, outlining improvements for tracking and summarizing user interactions in group channels.

docs/content/docs/(messaging)/discord-setup.mdx, after:

---
title: Discord Setup
description: Connect Spacebot to Discord.
---

# Discord Setup

Connect Spacebot to your Discord server. Takes about 5 minutes.

You need a **Bot Token** from a Discord application.

## Step 1: Create an Application

Go to [discord.com/developers/applications](https://discord.com/developers/applications) → **New Application**.

Name it whatever you want — this is the internal name, not the bot's display name.

## Step 2: Create a Bot

In your application settings, go to **Bot**:

- Click **Add Bot**
- Copy the **bot token** — you'll need this in a moment
- Scroll down to **Privileged Gateway Intents** and enable **Message Content Intent**

<Callout type="warn">
**Message Content Intent is required.** Without it, the bot cannot connect to Discord and will fail with "Disallowed intent(s)" error. Make sure it's enabled and you've clicked **Save Changes** at the bottom of the Bot page.
</Callout>

## Step 3: Invite the Bot to Your Server

In your application settings, go to **OAuth2** → **URL Generator**:

- Scopes: `bot`
- Bot Permissions:
  - Send Messages
  - Send Messages in Threads
  - Create Public Threads
  - Read Message History
  - Embed Links
  - Attach Files
  - Add Reactions

Copy the generated URL and open it in your browser to invite the bot.

## Step 4: Get Your Guild ID

In Discord, enable Developer Mode (User Settings → Advanced → Developer Mode). Right-click your server name → **Copy Server ID**. This is your guild ID.

## Step 5: Add Token to Spacebot

<Tabs items={["Spacebot UI", "TOML Config"]}>
<Tab value="Spacebot UI">

1. Open your Spacebot dashboard
2. Go to **Settings** → **Messaging Platforms**
3. Click **Setup** on the Discord card
4. Paste your **Bot Token**
5. Click **Save**

Spacebot connects immediately — no restart needed.

</Tab>
<Tab value="TOML Config">

```toml
[messaging.discord]
enabled = true
token = "your-bot-token"

[[bindings]]
agent_id = "main"
channel = "discord"
guild_id = "YOUR_GUILD_ID"
```

You can also reference environment variables:

```toml
[messaging.discord]
enabled = true
token = "env:DISCORD_BOT_TOKEN"
```

Token changes in config require a restart.

</Tab>
</Tabs>

## Verify It's Working

The Discord card on the Settings page shows a green status dot when connected. Send a message in a channel the bot has access to — you should see a typing indicator followed by a reply.

## Filtering

### Restrict to specific channels

By default the bot responds in every channel it has access to. To limit it, add channel IDs to your binding.

<Tabs items={["Spacebot UI", "TOML Config"]}>
<Tab value="Spacebot UI">

Go to **Settings** → **Bindings** tab and add channel IDs to your Discord binding.

</Tab>
<Tab value="TOML Config">

```toml
[[bindings]]
agent_id = "main"
channel = "discord"
guild_id = "123456789"
channel_ids = ["111111", "222222"]
```

If `channel_ids` is empty or omitted, the bot responds in all channels.

</Tab>
</Tabs>

### Require mentions per channel

Set `require_mention = true` on a Discord binding to only process messages that either:

- explicitly @mention the bot, or
- reply to a bot message

```toml
[[bindings]]
agent_id = "main"
channel = "discord"
guild_id = "123456789"
channel_ids = ["111111", "222222"]
require_mention = true
```

This works nicely for busy channels where you only want direct interactions.

### DM filtering

By default, all DMs are ignored. To allow specific users, add their Discord user IDs.

<Tabs items={["Spacebot UI", "TOML Config"]}>
<Tab value="Spacebot UI">

Go to **Settings** → **Messaging Platforms** → Discord card and add user IDs to the **DM Allowed Users** list.

</Tab>
<Tab value="TOML Config">

```toml
[messaging.discord]
dm_allowed_users = ["USER_ID_1", "USER_ID_2"]
```

You can also set per-binding DM allowlists:

```toml
[[bindings]]
agent_id = "main"
channel = "discord"
guild_id = "123456789"
dm_allowed_users = ["USER_ID_3"]
```

Per-binding lists are merged with the instance-wide list. Permission changes hot-reload within a couple seconds — no restart needed.

</Tab>
</Tabs>

### Multiple servers

Route different Discord servers to different agents.

<Tabs items={["Spacebot UI", "TOML Config"]}>
<Tab value="Spacebot UI">

Create multiple bindings in the **Bindings** tab, each with a different guild ID and agent.

</Tab>
<Tab value="TOML Config">

```toml
[[bindings]]
agent_id = "main"
channel = "discord"
guild_id = "123456789"

[[bindings]]
agent_id = "dev-bot"
channel = "discord"
guild_id = "987654321"
```

Each agent has its own memory, identity, and conversation history.

</Tab>
</Tabs>

## Threads

Threads get their own separate conversation with isolated history. Messages in the main channel share one conversation. Threads are the natural fit for isolated conversations in a busy server.

## Troubleshooting

| Symptom | Cause | Fix |
|---------|-------|-----|
| `Disallowed intent(s)` error in logs | Message Content Intent not enabled | Discord Developer Portal → Bot → enable Message Content Intent → Save Changes |
| Bot connects but doesn't see messages | Message Content Intent disabled | Discord Developer Portal → Bot → enable Message Content Intent |
| Bot doesn't respond in channel | No access | Make sure the bot has permissions in that channel |
| Bot doesn't respond to DMs | DM filtering | Add user ID to `dm_allowed_users` |
| Bot responds in wrong channels | No channel filter | Add `channel_ids` to your binding |
| `401 Unauthorized` on startup | Invalid token | Copy a fresh token from the Developer Portal |
